--- 
name: moving-on
layout: post
title: Moving On
time: 2011-03-27 14:12:00 -04:00
---
It is no secret that I want to move away from Puerto Rico. I've been saying that for two or three years already, and yet, here I am. There are many reasons why I haven't done it yet. The thought is always on my mind, I'm always weighting the alternatives, considering each possibility. Maybe writing this all down will help settle these thoughts.

First, why move? 

Puerto Rico is no place to build a startup. That word can refer to all kinds of businesses, so let's be clear. Yes, you may build a mom-and-pop, dude-business, whatever-you-call-it, here in Puerto Rico. You can build it anywhere, in fact. You just need an internet connection and the entrepreneurial drive to keep at it. When I say startup, I'm talking about bigger ideas. The kind of big ideas that need funding and a great team to execute them.

This kind of company, you may argue, can be built out of Silicon Valley. That is correct, but I would counter that you would still have a bigger advantage within Silicon Valley. Actors go to Hollywood and Broadway, financial analysts go to New York City, entrepreneurs and investors go to Silicon Valley. That does not mean that these industries don't exist out of these cities. It just means that if you're not at the epicenter of your industry, you are just competing with C players. As I thrive on learning and improving all of my skills, I can't help but wish to go at it with the big players.

There might be a bubble in Silicon Valley, but there is a bubble here in Puerto Rico as well. Our neither-here-nor-there dual identity keeps most businesses within the Puerto Rican bubble. We are not a state, we are not an independent country. Building something for the United States audience? Good luck - we may have absorbed many customs through Cable TV and movies, but you are still in Puerto Rico. It's a big country and you will need many resources, from marketing to advertising to development, to reach your audience. Might as well do it from a city with good access to all of these.

Building something for Puerto Rico? Congrats. Just keep in mind that we are not even 4 million in this island. You will eventually hit a cap (and remember, I'm not talking about running a lifestyle company).

Building something for the global hispanic community? I've never liked that idea. I don't see a lot of unity and cooperation amongst the hispanic countries when it comes to technology. The closest we have is TV networks such as Univision and Telemundo, but that's entertainment. There's so much animosity between hispanic countries, where the slightest foreign accent, even when it's spanish, will turn customers away.

These excuses are just that. Excuses. It's my justification for not going in either of these directions. Don't take offense if you prefer to run a business in any of these ways. It's just not the direction I personally wish to go in. The kind of work and companies I admire just happen to be based out of the San Francisco Bay Area, so over the years I've come up with these reasons not to do anything out of that ecosystem.

There's also this negative aura in Puerto Rico which I can't take any more. Crime keeps going up, the murder rate is through the roof. Access to broadband is expensive and slow. Reggaeton. The whole independence movement. Traffic. Horrible drivers. The attitude. I hate all of these, and I have tried for years to come to terms with these facts of living in this island. It's taken a toll. I'm whining about these every single day. I wish to focus on my work, on improving my portfolio, creating great websites and iPhone apps, but every day I spend most of my energy fighting with the environment.

But why am I still here? I have an apartment. I'm paying a mortgage. I'm set! Well. No. Looking back, buying this apartment is one of the worst decisions I've made. It was rushed. It wasn't well thought out. I had spent five years living away, on my own, at college, and I couldn't wait to have my own place again. The one year I lived back again with my parents, all I could think of was getting my own place. No, don't rent, people told me. Why rent, when you can buy your own place! Rent is money that is thrown away not to be seen. Well, fuck you. Now I'm stuck in this place, it's not even in a good location, and home values have kept going down. I didn't put anything down on this place, plus I got stuck with a 6.75% APR. I had budgeted maybe $900 total for housing costs. Looked like $100,000 to $120,000 would be the sweet spot. During this time, I was studying for my engineering license, which can take a few months of non-stop study. Finally in April 2007 I aced the tests and went back to apartment hunting. Found a place for $150,000, it was close to my parent's home, in the same town I had lived before college, and I thought it was a steal. The bank told me that with my salary, I could afford up to a $175,000 mortgage. Fuck them. Sometime between that figure, and the final closing costs appraisal, the monthly payment shot up to $1,000, plus maintenance fees ($115), and utilities ($200). Holy shit. How did I sign into this monthly payment? 46% over budget? Well, at the time I was salaried, climbing up the corporate ladder. I could afford it, of course! Gah, I just want to go back in time and slap myself silly.

And yet... I don't know if I should regret that decision. I've had a comfy place to live in for the last four years. My own place. At 23, I was a System Architect, licensed Engineer in the "state" of Puerto Rico, and had a mortgage. As long as I kept doing a great job, I was set.

It wasn't until later that it all hit me. I didn't want to spend 30 years in the same company. I wasn't learning any more. The whole Internet industry was changing around us, but my employer was slow moving. New technologies kept popping up, but they were ignored. 

Internet access. Broadband in San Juan, Puerto Rico is horrible. The blame can be directed entirely at Onelink Communications. They singlehandedly have retarded Puerto Rico's technological progress for the last few years. 

